Atmospheric temperature is part of a very complex system, modelled by the equations of meteorology for short-term predictions and by climatology for long-term statistical estimations. The 3 fundamental blocks of meteorology are the equations for fluids for the atmosphere, the Navier-Stokes or shallow water equations for the oceans and the radiative transfer equations (RTE) for sunlight and infrared radiations from Earth. RTE uses Planck’s law for blackbodies, absorption and scattering models adjusted to measurements. 

This book focuses on the mathematical and numerical aspects of RTE with applications to the atmosphere. Many works on this subject have been written, mostly by physicists, astrophysicists, and nuclear engineers. Our approach, however, is from the perspective of numerical analysis: we study the existence and uniqueness of the integro-partial differential system for the mean radiance and the temperature, their numerical approximations, and their computer implementations. We prove that a family of algorithms based on an integral formulation of the equations, combined with source iterations, are faster than other methods like Monte-Carlo and Discrete Ordinate Methods because they generate monotone convergent sequences. Applications to the effects of clouds and greenhouse gases are presented and various computer implementations in C++, Python and Matlab are given.

The first chapter introduces the problem and some basic numerical methods. Chapter 2 develops the stratified approximation (1D in space). The third chapter presents a fast method for 3D computations using H-matrices. The fourth, fifth and sixth chapters extends the methods to polarized light, to media with varying refractive indices, and finally to discontinuous refractive indices with Fresnel reflection and refraction conditions for air/ocean medium. The last chapter provides a brief survey of mathematical methods for deriving the RTE from Maxwell’s equations, along with direct (non-algorithmic) existence results.
